---
layout: post
title: "Chaincode Lightning Apps Residency"
category: blog
excerpt: Chaincode is proud to announce a Lightning Applications Residency program.
---
Chaincode is proud to announce a [Lightning applications residency
program](https://lightningresidency.com/), taking place in New York, Oct
22–26 2018!  We’ve already hosted two residency programs, in
[2016](http://bluematt.bitcoin.ninja/2016/08/08/chaincode/) and
[2018](https://hackerresidency.com/) . Those were focused on the Bitcoin
protocol and contributing to Bitcoin Core. This time we’re going to try
something a bit different.

The Lightning network is maturing every day and we’re beginning to see great
applications like [satoshis.place](https://satoshis.place/) and
[yalls.org](https://yalls.org/) being built on top of it. There’s a huge amount
of excitement growing around Lightning applications, but knowledge of how to
build those applications is currently scarce and diffuse.

We want to help bootstrap the emerging Lightning applications developer
ecosystem, so we’re hosting a week-long residency specifically for Lightning
application developers (as opposed to Lightning protocol developers), organised
by us, with mentoring and speaking by experts in the Lightning applications
space.

<img class="center-img" src="./residency2018.png" alt="Residency 2018">

**We’ve got a stellar line-up of guest speakers:**

- [Chris Steward](https://twitter.com/Chris_Stewart_5) is the founder of
  [SuredBits](https://suredbits.com/), a real-time micropayment-powered data
  service, built on top of the Lightning network. He is also the maintainer of
  [bitcoin-s](https://bitcoin-s.org/) and a former Chaincode resident.

- [Christian Decker](https://twitter.com/snyke) is an engineer at Blockstream
  and is a maintainer of the
  [c-lightning](https://github.com/ElementsProject/lightning) Lightning
  implementation. He is also co-author of the 2015 [Duplex Micropayment
  Channels](https://www.tik.ee.ethz.ch/file/716b955c130e6c703fac336ea17b1670/duplex-micropayment-channels.pdf)
  paper and the 2018 [eltoo paper](https://blockstream.com/eltoo.pdf).
 
- [Elaine Ou](https://twitter.com/eiaine) is an engineer at
  [Global Financial Access](http://globalfinancialaccess.com/). She has implemented
  the [LightningBuddy](https://github.com/elaineo/LightningBuddy)
  and [Jellybean](https://github.com/elaineo/Jellybean) applications on top of
  Lightning.
 
- [Jack Mallers](https://twitter.com/JackMallers) is the lead developer of
  [zap](http://zap.jackmallers.com/), a desktop and iOS wallet for Lightning
  payments
  
- [Justin Camarena](https://twitter.com/juscamarena) is an engineer at
  [bitrefill](https://www.bitrefill.com/), the first payment processor to
  accept mainnet Lightning payments. He was the lead engineer for integrating
  Lightning into bitrefill’s payment system.
 
- [lightningk0ala](https://twitter.com/lightningk0ala)
  is the creator of the wildly popular
  [satoshis.place](https://satoshis.place/) Lightning app. He’s an expert on
  Lightning-powered games.

We’re looking for experienced applications developers, perhaps with a
background in web apps or Ethereum apps, who want to learn about integrating
Lightning payments into applications. No experience of the Bitcoin or Lightning
protocols are required.

The residency will be project-based, and applicants will build a prototype
application over the course of the week. Residents will have a chance to
present their work on Friday afternoon.

All guest speaker talks and presentations will be video recorded and made
freely available. We want to scale the benefits of this residency to engineers
who aren’t able to join us in person.
  
We’re really excited about this new residency and are looking forward to some
excellent talks and amazing new Lightning applications

_Originally posted at [http://lightningresidency.com](http://lightningresidency.com)_
